README.md, before:

# What is this place?

This is a repository for open slides presented to the public. It is not to be confused with the private repository hosted on our [UiO Enterprise GitHub page](https://github.uio.no/ocbe/meeting-notes-and-slides), designed to host presentations containing private or sensitive information not ready for public release. It may, however, host privately-presented slides that can be publicly available as long as they comply with the repository license (read more about it [below](#license)).

# File naming convention

Please prepend your files with the presentation date in the format `YYYYMMDD-` so they are properly sorted and more easily findable.

# License

**Attention**: this repository is licensed by _Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 4.0 International_, meaning all content here is subjected to the same license (except for files in the `Presentations/img` folder which were not created by the authors). If you want to know what this implies, please take a look at [this](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/cc-by-sa-4.0/) and [this](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/). You can find some nice, high-resolution CC icons [here](https://creativecommons.org/about/downloads/).

Before uploading content, we suggest adding the license information to your slides. You can read more about this [here](https://creativecommons.org/choose/results-one?license_code=by-sa&amp;jurisdiction=&amp;version=4.0&amp;lang=en).

Commit message:

Updated recommendation regarding file names

README.md, after:

# What is this place?

This is a repository for open slides presented to the public. It is not to be confused with the private repository hosted on our [UiO Enterprise GitHub page](https://github.uio.no/ocbe/meeting-notes-and-slides), designed to host presentations containing private or sensitive information not ready for public release. It may, however, host privately-presented slides that can be publicly available as long as they comply with the repository license (read more about it [below](#license)).

# File naming convention

Please prefix your files with the presentation date in the format `YYYYMMDD-` so they are properly sorted and more easily findable. Also avoid using spaces in the file name because computers are often scared of those.

# License

**Attention**: this repository is licensed by _Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 4.0 International_, meaning all content here is subjected to the same license (except for files in the `Presentations/img` folder which were not created by the authors). If you want to know what this implies, please take a look at [this](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/cc-by-sa-4.0/) and [this](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/). You can find some nice, high-resolution CC icons [here](https://creativecommons.org/about/downloads/).

Before uploading content, we suggest adding the license information to your slides. You can read more about this [here](https://creativecommons.org/choose/results-one?license_code=by-sa&amp;jurisdiction=&amp;version=4.0&amp;lang=en).
